so the Hebrews created history as we
know it
you don't get away with anything and so
you might think you can bend the fabric
of reality and that you can treat people
instrumentally and that you can bow to
the Tyrant and violate your conscience
without cost you will pay the piper it's
going to call you out of that slavery
into Freedom even if that pulls you into
the desert
and we're going to see that there's
something else going on here that is far
more Cosmic and deeper than what you can
imagine the highest ethical Spirit to
which we're beholden is presented
precisely as that spirit that allies
itself with the cause of Freedom against
tyranny I want villains to get punished
but do you want the villains to learn
before they have to pay the ultimate
price that's such a Christian question
when I first heard the argument that it
might have come from a lab I said no no
we're not nearly clever enough to design
a virus this good
um well once I found out what we were
doing or what they were doing I was
really shocked by how how far into the
manipulation and testing of dangerous
viruses we have gone in the last 10
years I'm trying to understand why there
would be motivation to
shut down let's say speculation
investigation into the possibility of a
lab leak and I guess maybe part of the
reason is that it reveals a reality that
in some sense is too Dreadful to
conveniently comprehend it'd be easier
in some sense in the short term just to
stick our heads in the sand and pretend
it isn't happening but we also have
another problem which is while the
Chinese are pretty damn authoritarian
and they're still run by the Communist
party which is a dreadful organization
we don't know how much our entanglement
with the Chinese tilts us towards that
totalitarian structure and so when the
pandemic emerged the totalitarians acted
first and they acted in a totalitarian
way which is well why don't we just lock
everyone down which is sort of the
totalitarian answer to everything and
then in our herd-like panic in the west
we immediately imitated them that's the
spread of a pathogen too right we have a
pathogen of of covid to contend with but
we also have a pathogen of totalitarian
totalitarianism to contend with and
I would say the latter poses a much
bigger threat than the former lest we
keep mucking about with gain of function
research
[Music]
hello everyone I'm happy today to be
speaking with Dr Matt Ridley one of the
world's most well-known and lucidly
minded rationalists I've spoken with
Matt before on my podcast and we're
going to talk today about among other
things about the origin of the kovid
virus so that should be entertaining
Matt Ridley is a British writer
journalist and public speaker
he has a ba and D field degree from
Oxford University
Matt also worked for the economist for
nine years as science editor he worked
as a Washington correspondent and
American editor as well before becoming
a self-employed writer and businessman
Matt writes a weekly column in the times
of London and also writes regularly for
the Wall Street Journal
as Viscount Ridley
he was elected to the House of Lords in
February 2013. and served on the Science
and Technology select committee from
2014 to 2017.
he won the Hayek prize in 2011 the
Julian Simon award in 2012 and the free
enterprise award from The Institute of
economic Affairs in 2014. he's a fellow
of the Royal Society of literature and
of the Academy of Medical sciences and a
foreign honorary member of the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences
he is honorary president of the
International Center for life in
Newcastle
Matt also holds honorary doctorates from
Buckingham University Cold Spring Harbor
laboratory and University Francisco
American Guatemala
his books have sold over a million
copies being translated into 31
languages and have won several Awards
his books include the Red Queen the
origins of virtue
genome
nature via nurture
Francis Crick
the rational optimist
the evolution of everything
how Innovation Works
and the revised and expanded version of
his latest book viral the search for the
origin of covid-19 we're going to talk
about a variety of issues including
not least the politicization of Science
and and perhaps the politicization of
everything but I think maybe we'll start
by walking through your your book on the
on the origin of covid-19 and so the
first thing I'm curious about I suppose
is
why did you decide to investigate the
origin of covid-19 why didn't you just
accept the idea that it emerged in the
in the exotic meat market and in in
Wuhan and like a good boy let's say and
leave it at that
it's a good question and the answer is
to start with I did accept the
conventional version
um but I was interested I'm a zoologist
by background and I was interested in
how these diseases jump uh and I thought
it was highly likely this one had jumped
like SARS did from a bat uh through the
food chain but I wanted nowhere and when
and how and I knew that the scientists
in Wuhan had a an idea about a similar
virus so I got the Wall Street Journal
to commission an article from me called
uh the bats behind the pandemic what was
it about horseshoe bats that was
um
harboring such viruses how were people
coming into contact with them what did
we know what was the story in this case
it was a very interesting story in the
case of SARS in 2003 to do with food
markets near Hong Kong what was going to
be the story in this case and in
investigating it I Came Upon anomalies
like the fact that this virus was not
particularly closely related to the bat
one they had like they couldn't tell me
where they found the bat one the paper
that I read didn't give the location and
the name of the virus the bat virus was
one that didn't appear in the scientific
literature and yet they said they'd
found it previously so I was rather
puzzled by all this and I called up a
number of virologists and they said well
yes there's some anomalies here we don't
we don't understand but it's nothing to
do with a lab leak you can rule that out
now I believe that for about two and a
half months and then I came across the
work of Alina Chan who eventually became
my co-author on this book and she was
saying actually we can't rule out a lab
leak there's quite a lot of things about
this story that make it really quite
plausible
that what's happened here is a is an
escape from a lab because we're dealing
with a virus that turns up in the city
which has the lab that does work on
sars-like coronaviruses more than any
other lab in the world and that
geographical coincidence has to be taken
seriously particularly when we find that
the virus from the bat that they
identified as being closely related to
SARS cov2
had been found effectively in their own
freezer
and that's a a starting point for for a
query so by the middle of May 2020
the Chinese were announcing they didn't
think it started in that market uh Alina
Chan was saying there's lots of evidence
to suggest this thing is well adapted to
human beings and the geographical
coincidence all got me interested in uh
this being an open question not a closed
one and one that needed further
investigation and the deeper I dug the
more emerged
okay so so let me summarize that so the
first
smoking pistol in some sense as you
point out is the
The Coincidence of the location of this
lab which studies exactly this kind of
virus and the outbreak itself
and that's that's a problem right so
that means that it's reasonable to look
at that and think that
well it could have escaped from a lab
there that's the first conclusion and
that
it has to be demonstrated in some sense
that it didn't and then so that's a
problem and I can't see how that's
anything but an incontrovertible problem
the mere fact that that lab is there and
that it does research on those types of
viruses and that that's where the
outbreak was doesn't prove that it
originated in the lab but it certainly
makes that a plausible hypothesis but
then you add this additional twist which
is I think more complicated for people
to understand and you detail this out
you you provide some detail for this in
the book that this virus is somewhat
remarkably well adapted to human beings
now there are literally trillions and
trillions of different forms
of viruses and so obviously most of them
aren't particularly well adapted to
human beings because otherwise we would
have trillions of viruses producing
pandemics through
all the time so it's generally the case
that viruses are not well adapted to
Transmission in human beings by the and
that's true for the overwhelming
majority of viruses and so the fact of
this human adaptation or adaptation to
human transmission is something of
signal importance and so maybe you could
walk me and everyone else listening
through
wide a typical virus isn't adapted to
human transmission and what it means
that one is and how that develops yes
um the normal pattern when a virus first
emerges into the human species is for it
to be very difficult for the virus to
spread human to human it can infect
someone it can even possibly kill
someone but they're not very good at
passing it on to people the virus is not
really very good at transmitting between
members of this new host now if enough
time goes by with enough infections
happening then eventually it will get
good at it and that's what was starting
to happen with SARS in 2003
um it it first infected people in in the
fall of 2002 by the spring of 2003 you
were starting to see chains of
transmission from person to person
and the reason for this is that the
virus has to evolve it has to change its
genetic code in such a way that it can
uh better fit The receptors on the cells
of humans as opposed to The receptors on
the cells of bats or in the case of SARS
the intermediate host which was a a palm
civet
[Music]
will the lack of a red wave during the
midterms lead to more Reckless spending
by a more emboldened Administration
higher taxes deeper inflation if you are
unsure how the next two years will
unfold talk to Birch gold group about
protecting your savings with gold Birch
gold makes it easy to convert your IRA
or 401K into an IRA in Precious Metals
so you can own gold and silver in a tax
sheltered account here's what you need
to do text Jordan to 989898 to claim
your free info kit on gold then talk to
one of their precious metal Specialists
they will hold your hand through the
entire process with an A plus rating
with the Better Business Bureau
thousands of happy customers and almost
20 years of experience converting IRAs
and 401ks into precious metals IRAs
Birch gold can help you protect your
savings too text Jordan to 989898 and
protect yourself with gold today that's
Jordan to 989898
[Music]
so so we should point out that the the
problem of transmission that a virus has
to solve is no different from the
problem of the virus determining in some
sense or evolving so that it can live
transmission in a virus is the same
thing as propagation in the environment
and so this is a very naughty problem
k-n-o-t-t-y for a virus to solve it's
not simple at all because it has to not
kill the host
too quickly and it has to be able to
replicate within an individual but then
it not only does it have to manage those
things which is very difficult also has
to figure out how to transmit itself
with some degree of Effectiveness and
thank God most viruses can't solve that
problem so this is a very thorny problem
and and you were you're maybe you can
outline for everyone how how viruses do
solve that problem and why most don't
and why the fact of human
of human adaptation to humans is so
important yeah so uh just to give you a
good example bird flu which is a a big
problem at the moment in poultry flocks
and wild birds
um is not very good at infecting human
beings people can catch it people have
even died of it if you're exposed to a
huge dose by working in a poultry farm
you can get sick and you'll probably die
but you probably won't give it to
anybody else we've not seen any human to
human transmission of that virus this
virus was good at transmitting between
human beings from the word go from from
the the November or December of 2019 and
the reason for that we now know in
molecular terms it has a so-called
receptor binding domain on its Spike
Gene which is well adapted to the human
ace2 receptor on our cells not very well
adapted to other species receptors which
is intriguing um it's it's a specific
human adaptation it looked well not
specific it's not completely specific
it's quite good at lots of of animals
but it's really good at us okay and the
other feature that it has that is very
striking and very surprising is that it
has something called a fearing cleavage
site now this is a small section of the
spike Gene that is coded by about 12
letters of RNA genetic code which has
been inserted into it compared with all
its close relatives
and that gives it the ability to use a
human enzyme called furin that is in all
our in much of many of our cells
in order to
reconfigure the virus as it leaves the
cell to make it uh to as it were prime
it to attack another cell
so it's actually using one of our
enzymes to spread in the body this
enables it to infect more tissues in the
body and to multiply much more
effectively so it's a it's the reason
we're having a pandemic is the fearing
cleavage site if that if this virus
didn't have that it would probably have
been pretty easy to control in the early
months you said something very
interesting and this is another piece of
the puzzle I presume is that compared to
other viruses of its type it has this
interesting fear and cleavage site I've
got that right and you said that it had
been inserted and that's a uh
well that's an anomalous statement let's
say so there's something about this
particular virus that sets it out
against other viruses of its type and
it's this particular ability to to use a
human enzyme and you describe that as
inserted and so I presume that could be
inserted as a consequence hypothetically
of natural selection processes or that
there's other alternative explanations
so so what do you see when you look at
that
what I mean by inserted here is that
it's it's it's an extra piece of genetic
information we can look at
um 20 or 30 other very similar viruses
and we can we can align their genomes up
and match them up against this one and
the the fearing cleavage site is not a
an altered bit it's an added bit it's an
extra chunk that's been added in the
middle of the spike Gene so how how do
you how do you differentiate between
added and different I I presume that's a
consequence of degree of Divergence so
you could imagine that there's a set of
viruses that are genetically and
evolutionarily similar so they stem from
a similar source and they have a
predictable pattern of variation
and you're saying that this is an
anomaly that exists outside that
well you you line them up you align the
VAR the genetic codes of the viruses and
in this particular part of the spike
gene they all align up quite well you
know the sequence is mostly the same you
can tell it's been added because you can
align the gene genes of uh the spike
genes of other viruses alongside each
other and see that this is an extra
piece of of RNA not a changed piece of
RNA it's about 12 letters long and This
spells out a sequence that allows it's
called a fury and cleavage site and it
allows the virus to use a human enzyme
called furin to spread from cell to cell
from tissue to tissue and effectively
makes the virus much more dangerous and
much more transmissible it's the reason
we're having a pandemic if the virus
didn't have this fearing cleavage site
we'd probably have been able to get it
under control very easily early in the
pandemic now what's interesting is that
a number of Western virologists when
they first saw the sequence of this
virus said whoa it's got a fearing
cleavage side in that's very unusual for
a sars-like virus in fact it's Unique
we've never seen one with this before
there are other coronaviruses with
fearing cleavage sites but not SARS like
coronaviruses and they said
I'm afraid that suggests it might have
been engineered now they kept those
thoughts to themselves we only know
about them now because of leaks of
emails that have
emerged more than a year later but they
got on a conference call at the
beginning of February U.S and UK and
other virologists about a dozen of them
who are these days who are these people
these this they that you're referring to
that and and in the early stages of
space station
yeah these are virologists so senior
virologists who've been studying this
kind of virus or other similar outbreaks
there's about a dozen of them but also
on the call was Dr Anthony fauci the
head of the National Institute of
allergies and infectious diseases in the
US and and the main advisor to the
president on this and Dr Jeremy Farah a
senior advisor to the British government
and the head of the welcome trust in the
UK which had funded a lot of research of
this kind
um and they discussed on this call their
doubts that this virus was natural and
they're worried that it might have been
engineered within two days however that
same group of virologists started
drafting an article
um which was eventually published in
nature medicine saying it couldn't
possibly have been engineered the
fearing cleavage site will probably turn
up in a wild bat virus well it hasn't so
far and the reason they have given for
changing their mind after these emails
emerge showing what they were actually
thinking in February is that the Chinese
had announced they'd found a virus in a
Pangolin you probably remember that a
scaly anteater
that is trafficked because of it the
belief that it contributes to
good medical health and so on if you eat
its scales it's not true they're made of
the same stuff as fingernails you might
as well eat your finger nails but still
it's a widely held belief and as a
result many of these scaly anteaters are
trafficked into China
well it turns out that that a a
university in China announced in
February 2020 that they'd found a very
similar virus and 99 similar virus in
Pangolin and people thought right case
closed we found the intermediate animal
we know what's happening well there's
three problems with that one when they
eventually published the sequence of
this Pangolin virus it was not very
similar it was 90 similar that's not
good enough it's nothing like close
enough
two it didn't have the fury and cleavage
side in and three there were no
pangolins on sale in Wuhan so it
couldn't have explained how the outbreak
happened oh yeah those are those are
problems those are big problems so we're
in this strange situation where this
particular feature has alarmed Western
virologists but they've kept the
information to themselves we didn't find
out about all this for months remember
no it's worse than that it's worse than
that because these virologists that
you're talking about include fauci
and so it's not just it's not just
virologists it's it's the virologists
who end up being in charge of the entire
response and so the question that
emerges for me there is that if they
were concerned about this being a lab
leak
then
why this strenuous attempt to deflect
now there's two possible reasons one is
that they didn't want to move forward
with their presumption that it was a
loudly lab leak without a smoking pistol
and that's fair enough because you might
think well we're we're concerned and
we're incurring but we're not going to
uh beat the drum about the lab leak till
we're certain and then there's whatever
other reasons might be lurking in the
background and I suppose that's partly
what we're trying to investigate and so
that would be the Scandal that would
emerge perhaps if it was a lab leak and
what that might do to Chinese American
relationships and what it says about
virology research in general and and God
only knows what other host of
explanations and so but it's very
striking to me so you've laid out you've
laid out a story that goes well first of
all
there was a lab in Wuhan that was doing
research that was strikingly similar on
viruses that were strikingly similar to
the virus that caused the pandemic and
that is the geographical Locale of the
origin of the pandemic and then the
virus itself has peculiarities that
might indicate engineering and so that's
two pieces of evidence that are starting
to converge pretty hard and unlikely
convergence and then you have the
virologists themselves including those
who are in charge of the response or who
will be eventually also noting that this
looks uh suspicious to say the least and
then for some reason and in a great
scientific journal or at least a once
great scientific journal downplaying
their own fears and so
what's the motivation here what what's
going on precisely
you don't ride an elevator for the music
or choose an airline for their movie
selection when it comes to audio
entertainment it makes sense to choose
audible audible is the home of
Storytelling whether it's an epic
adventure a chilling mystery or a can't
miss comedy it houses all your audio
entertainment audiobooks podcasts and
Originals in one single app so that you
can find the best of what you love or
discover something new as an audible
member you can choose one title per
month to keep from their entire catalog
including the latest best sellers and
new releases
members also get full access to a
growing selection of included audiobooks
audible originals and podcasts you can
download or stream included titles all
you want you can even listen to Dr
Peterson's Beyond order on Audible let
audible help you discover new ways to
laugh Be Inspired or be entertained new
members can try it for free for 30 days
visit audible.com Peterson or text
Peterson to 500-500 that's audible.com
Peterson or text Peterson to 500 500 to
try audible free for 30 days audible.com
Peterson
well um the the words an exchange of
emails among these scientists in which
um some of them said uh it's important
that we uh don't damage International
Harmony that was the phrase used by
Francis Collins the head of the NIH in
these emails and another one says we
mustn't damage the reputation of science
and of Chinese science in particular
now at the same time another letter was
you mean by by point do you mean by
pointing out that something unbelievably
and god-awfully and unforgivably
dangerous had actually happened
that was how we were going to damage the
reputation so to speak by by just
admitting that something catastrophic
had happened
and so it was reputation management
yes but clearly you know if you there is
a risk that the world rushes often comes
to the conclusion it came out of a lab
and this damages biotechnology and it's
not true it might have right right yes
in a natural way and then we've done and
then we've done unnecessary damage to
science which is a great pity and I you
know I'm a big fan of biotechnology I I
would think that was a problem so that
is one risk but the other risk is that
we are so worried about doing damage to
the reputation of science that we
Overlook the possibility that this thing
did start in the laboratory
um uh now at the same time also in
February 2020 the closest collaborator
of the Wuhan lab in the west a man named
Peter dazak who runs an organization
called Eco Health Alliance which had
funneled millions of dollars from U.S
taxpayers to This research in Wuhan over
the years
he was preparing a letter for the Lancet
which he got 27 scientists to sign
saying it was it couldn't possibly have
come from a lab and we've got to shut
down that possibility
he didn't
uh uh reveal his role in orchestrating
that he did was just one of the
signatures he didn't note his conflict
of interest in that letter the fact that
he was a very close collaborator and
friend of the Wuhan lab it took 18
months before the Lancet published a
statement of conflict of interest under
pressure on that but more important than
any of that the one crucial thing that
Peter dazak didn't reveal and that we
didn't find out until September 2021
was that he had put in an application to
the uh Pentagon to the DARPA that
research arm of the Pentagon
um in 2018 in collaboration with the
Wuhan Institute of virology among others
to do experiments on sars-like viruses
that they found in bats and those
experiments were to include if they
found ones that weren't very similar to
SARS one that were new
were to include putting a furin cleavage
site into such a virus
now that is a major Discovery and as I
say we found that out from a leaked
document it's called the project defuse
it came to light in September 2021
because someone in DARPA I think leaked
it to people who were investigating this
and Peter dazek hadn't bothered to tell
us
that he was the lead in investigator on
exactly this proposal now you know for
me as a as a citizen of the planet Earth
that's pretty annoying as a scientist
and and a writer about science
um it's even more annoying because you
know we all want to know what happened
here you know I don't go into this
wanting it to be a lab League I just
want to know the truth and it seems
absolutely vital to get us as much
information as we can now some of that
information is in China and they're not
being very forthcoming but information
that is in America
ought to be volunteered in this case
um the other thing that but the what the
thing that the Chinese have failed to do
is tell us what's in their database they
had a database of with 22 000 entries in
it at the Wuhan Institute of virology
which was
um Wildlife pathogens it was it was
bacteria and viruses that affected
Wildlife about 15 000 of them related to
bats and most of those were viruses so
these were the viruses they'd been
collecting from Mostly not from Wuhan
but from a long way away from Southern
China and Laos and other neighboring
countries and they'd been collecting
thousands of these viruses and they'd
been sequencing in them and they've been
characterizing them and describing them
and they had a database and the purpose
of this database
partly funded with U.S money was to
predict and prevent future pandemics
when uh in on the 12th of September 2019
that is about two months before the
pandemic started as far as we can tell
at two o'clock in the morning that
database went offline
it's never come back online uh we've
never therefore been able to access it
and look at what viruses they had in
that lab
now when we asked them why weren't you
show us that database which after all
the purpose of which was to share with
the world so that we could predict
pandemics remember
um they say oh well people might hack it
well that's a meaningless statement you
know if you're going to share it you
don't need to worry about people hacking
it you know it's a sort of circular
non-argument if you like
um uh and and remember showing us what's
in that database would be the quickest
way to exonerate the Wuhan Institute of
virology because it would show look they
didn't have a virus resembling SARS cov2
in there in their database and so case
closed but they won't show us that
document and that for me is a very very
important piece of information
we'll get back to our conversation with
Matt Ridley in just one minute first we
wanted to give you a sneak peek at
Jordan's new documentary logos and
literacy
I was very much struck by how the
translation of the biblical writings
jump started the development of literacy
across the entire world illiteracy was
the norm the pastor's home was the first
school and every morning it would begin
with singing the Christian faith is a
singing religion probably 80 percent of
scripts memorization today exists only
because of what is sung
amazing here we have a Gutenberg Bible
printed on the Press of Johan goodberg
science and religion are opposing forces
in the world but historically that has
not been the case now the book is
available to everyone from Shakespeare
to modern education and medicine and
science to to civilization itself it is
the most influential book in all history
and hopefully people can walk away with
at least a sense of that
yeah well this begs are broader this big
is a broader question too that was
popping up in my mind and perhaps this
is a reasonable place to interject uh to
broaden out the conversation
we don't really know what the
preconditions are
for science to function as it has
functioned let's say in the West for the
last 400 years but it's certainly the
case that
real scientists and there are very few
of them
because most scientists are
technicians in some real sense and
they're certainly not on The Cutting
Edge and they're worried about the
pushing forward of their career let's
say and other extraneous issues rather
than concentrating on the science at
hand it's an unbelievably stringently
ethical Enterprise
if you want to be a good scientist you
have to assume that
what you don't know should take priority
over what you do know that's hypothesis
testing in some real sense
and
you also have to be willing to go where
the data takes you and you have to do
your statistical analysis in the most
honest possible manner and all of that
requires the abiding by an
extraordinarily stringent ethic and and
yet we tend to think of science as a
technical Enterprise and when we presume
that it's a technical Enterprise we also
presume that
for example it could take place in any
real sense in a totalitarian country
that you can do science in a
totalitarian country and it isn't
obvious to me at all that you can do
science in a totalitarian country and
the reason for that is that in a
totalitarian country
everyone lies about everything all the
time
that's a very good point and that
actually brings up questions that were
raised in a report that came from the
senate in recent weeks the help
Committee of the Senate the Republican
side of that committee has employed
experts to spend a couple of
um
several months a year and a bit actually
investigating exactly what was going on
in that laboratory in Wuhan in 2018 19
and 20. and what they discovered was
that there was some kind of Crisis over
biosafety in the lab in in in November
of 2019.
um there were meetings very high level
meetings uh Beijing got involved Xi
Jinping himself seems to have been
consulted
um and the lab was basically given a
major ticking off about failures on
biosafety
um and there's a lot of sort of
self-examination going on
but to your point these documents that
revealed this are communist party
documents
um that is to say like every
organization in China the Wuhan lab is
basically run by the Communist party and
as part of that you as a scientist have
to keep reporting to the party what
you're doing how hard you're working and
how it's going to glorify the Communist
party right right right to the part yes
exactly and that's not science and
well
um you can do good science while doing
that but it's very clear that the
direction the party is giving you in
2019 is come on we want more results out
of this science we haven't seen enough
from these virology experiments
um we need to to why aren't you getting
more results getting more papers
published Etc there's a real pressure on
these scientists you can read you can
read it in these documents to do more
work but then there's also real pressure
to for God's sake stop having these
accidents or whatever it is it's never
quite That explicit but uh you know
um uh what can you do to solve these
biosafety problems that you've got in
the lab now all of that suggests that
there was pressure to do risky
experiments and there was pressure to
clean up the safety record of the lab at
the time that something
started in Wuhan now again none of that
proves that that's how it began
but given the experiments that we know
they were doing that they published
these were Chimera virus experiments
where you take uh part of the gene from
one virus and you insert it into another
in order to make a hybrid virus to see
how dangerous the spiked Gene of the
newly discovered virus is in a live
virus that you know how to grow and
those experiments resulted in
up to ten thousand times increases in
the infectivity of viruses in human
cells human Airway epithelial cells is
that the gain of function research that
people refer to can't yes and the
function that's being gained is trend is
transmissible is transmissibleness is
the capacity of the original gain of
function debate yeah the original gain
of function debate was about how to turn
a bird flu into a mammal flu how to give
it the new function of infecting mammal
but but uh the the term then came to be
used for increases in the infectivity or
the virulence of viruses
okay so okay so let me know
all right so let me ask you a question
about that so
we've already established earlier in
this conversation that there are
trillions upon trillions of viral
variants
and a very very tiny fraction of those
pose a human risk almost an
infinitesimally small fraction
and so the vast majority of viruses are
harmless
and so and then the theory would be well
there are some that are still harmful
and we need to understand those and fair
enough and one of the ways of
understanding them is to produce more
dangerous viral variants in the lab
and then we can study
these more dangerous variants but that
seems to me to assume that
you're presuming that the more dangerous
functions that you're adding to the
viruses are in some sense going to be
representative of more dangerous viruses
in general so that you can generalize
Beyond them and you're also assuming
that the risk of an accident or an
outbreak in relationship to poor
handling of these new viruses that
you're creating is less of a risk than
natural variation in the viruses
themselves would be likely to produce it
isn't obvious to me at all a priority
that any of those presumptions are even
vaguely correct
that's exactly right that's exactly the
calculation that they were making
um that it was worth doing this research
because you would identify viruses that
could cause a pandemic this way and that
that risk would the risk of causing an
accident was less than than that risk
that we're running naturally
um though there was a lot of criticism
of this when they began this uh sort of
research not just in Wuhan but elsewhere
in the world
um about 10 years ago uh uh under a U.S
funded program called prevent
um there was a number of virologists who
quite openly said we think this is a
mistake we think you're looking for a
needle in the haystack you'll probably
find the wrong needle
um uh we don't think that you're going
to find anything useful this way
um and they didn't also add but there
was other people saying and by the way
aren't you creating the very risk that
you're worrying about you're looking for
a gas leak with a lighted match as
someone put it
um now I think most of us now looking at
what was going on in Wuhan in that
laboratory in the Years leading up to
the pandemic
um are convinced that even if this one
didn't happen that way it could have and
that going forward we should not be
doing this kind of research well after a
short pause the US government resumed
its donations to the Eco Health Alliance
to work with partner Labs doing this
kind of research elsewhere in the world
during and after the pandemic
men is it time to stop mindless
scrolling time to finally gain that
higher quality of life you know you're
missing out on if this sounds familiar
then on January 9th join thousands of
men all over the world to embark on a
90-day journey together in search of a
better life
it's called Exodus 90 and it was built
to help men enjoy the freedom of
becoming who they were truly made to be
Exodus 90 guides you in removing the
attachments that are holding you back
from a better life and it actually works
independent research shows that Exodus
90 men report considerable shifts after
the first 90 days including stronger
satisfaction rates in their marriages
more meaningful prayer lives and
dramatic decreases in time spent on
their phones
for the past seven years Exodus has
helped more than 60 thousand men build a
road map for living with virtue in a
culture that offers far too many paths
to self-destruction
is it time for your Exodus we start
January 9th find resources to prepare
for Exodus at exodus90.com Jordan that's
exodus90.com Jordan
recently and there recently means
October 27th in the journal science
online and so so just for everyone
watching and listening to know there's
two journals in the world science and
nature that are regarded by scientists
in virtually every discipline as the
Pinnacle of scientific publication
and so if you're a career scientist and
you publish in science or nature that's
a career making publication it's the
equivalent of a bestseller let's say or
a hit movie in the scientific community
and both science and nature are among
the oldest of scientific journals and
the most prestigious and they had their
origin in the UK and so everyone in the
scientific Community is uh
has been for decades very impressed with
science and nature so I'm telling
everyone that just so you know the
significance of this of this publication
Outlet now there's an article there that
was written by John Cohen on October 27
22 talking about this Senate
investigation that Matt just referred to
and let me read a little bit about this
um
the mysterious origin of the covid-19
pandemic like so many aspects of the
response has created deep divides along
party lines in the United States okay so
that's the opening statement and so
basically the opening statement is
designed to convince both the writer and
the reader that the primary issue here
with regards to the lab leak hypothesis
is one of politics and not of fact or
science and then the article continues
many virologists and evolutionary
biologists who have studied the origins
of outbreaks dismiss the lab leak
hypothesis many virologists let's say
but other scientists have complained
that the possibility was too readily
downplayed okay so there's this dispute
but then the the writer continues and it
has become increasingly popular among
conservative media outlets and some
Republican politicians so instantly
politicizing it again now this Senate uh
report which is reported here as a
minority staff concludes in its 30 page
report 35-page report that the covid
pandemic was more than likely more
likely than not the result of a research
related incident and then the author
immediately jumps to this statement
which is that conclusion stands in sharp
contrast to that of other panels
including from the World Health
Organization and U.S intelligence
agencies which have deemed a zoonotic
jump more likely or remain neutral given
the lack of direct evidence on the
origin of the virus okay so we're being
enjoined by the Journal science itself
to assume that all of this discussion
about the origin of the lab leak is
somehow politicking okay so let's take
that apart for a minute so that's
predicated on the assumption that the
Republicans and the conservatives let's
say both narrowly and more broadly have
something specific to gay pain
right in a in a power related manner
by advancing the claim that the
origin of the virus was in some sense a
lab leak and for the life of me I can't
understand why that's
political
it's like it was either a lab leak or it
wasn't
that's pretty damn evident and it isn't
obvious to me that the facts stand on
one side of the political divider and
others so then I'm wondering why in the
world is it that Science magazine is
publishing an article claiming that the
real reason that anybody is concerned
about whether or not this was a lab leak
is because of Republican party
Shenanigans and so what do you think
about that
well it's true that America is very
politically polarized and there's a
tendency in a much of the media to see
everything in a Republican versus
Democrat
um lens uh these days that doesn't work
for the rest of us who aren't Americans
um we don't have to see the world that
way we can think of it as a scientific
question rather than a political
question
um and uh
it's true that the early in the pandemic
a Republican president Donald Trump
uh kept saying it might have come from a
lab well we happen to know that a number
of scientists privately agreed with him
but didn't say so at the time but the
real divide here and we see this on
social media all the time we get active
debates about this going on the real
divide is not between people who think
it was a lab leak and people who think
it was a market zoonosis
but people who think that we haven't
answered the question yet and we need to
keep looking at both hypotheses what I
call the open question side of the
debate which I'm on which my co-authors
on which everybody who thinks a lab leak
is possible thinks I don't I don't know
anyone who thinks it's 100 certain it
was a lab League
and on the other side of the question
are the case closed crowd who say no no
we can already rule out a lab league for
certain
and that seems to me immensely premature
and here's why in the case of SARS we
were able to rule out a lab leak and
know that it came over a market because
we found the infected animal we found
the Civic cat that had had caught the
virus from the bat and gave it to people
and we found the index cases you know
these were food handlers and chefs and
people who were cooking civet cats you
know the chain of transmission was very
clear
in this case we've found no infected
animals
we found no evidence in blood banks of
previously infected people we found
nobody who looks like an index case the
only thing we've found is that there was
a concentration of early cases in that
food market in Wuhan
and a number of scientists the ones
referred to in that John Cohen article
in science
regard that evidence that there were
quite a lot of early cases in that
market or near that market as so-called
dispositive in other words they can
clear we can close the case we can go
home shut up the inquiry and say we know
the certain it came out of that and the
rest of us say now hang on you haven't
found an infected at all you haven't
found an early case and by the way we
know why there was a concentration of
cases in that market because in the
early days of the pandemic if you had
pneumonia
and you went to hospital
they were told to consider kovid as a
cause only if you lived near that market
so it's a circular argument
um uh of course the early cases were
near the market because that's the only
place they were looking it's like the
drunk who says I'm looking for my uh um
car keys under this street light because
that's where the light is
um so
um you know again I'm not making the
case that the market couldn't have been
the place where it happened I'm making
the case that we can't just definitively
conclude that yet well you you're
actually you're making a stronger case
well you're making a stronger case than
that I would say in some sense because
you're saying that when we've done
similar things previously we've been
able to find animals who had that virus
variant and we just haven't been able to
find those animals at all so what you're
saying is that the only evidence that it
came from the market is that there are
cases that were reported earlier that
were associated with the market but
that's the only piece of evidence that
it's coming from the market and so I
think it seems to me and correct me if
I'm wrong that you're being cautious and
underplaying the evidence that suggests
that something is rotten in the state of
Denmark let's say I mean we we well it's
it's slightly the evidence to be fair
the evidence is slightly better than
that because there were a number of
samples in the market that were taken
that were positive for this virus they
were environmental samples that is to
say door knobs countertops sewage things
like that you know they weren't animals
or people they were uh they were
um uh they were swabs swabs taken right
so we know the virus was circulating
there
exactly but they're all they're they're
all but one of one strain of the virus
which is one of the early human strains
the other is the other human strain uh
and there's one swab that shows that one
but most of the other swabs for most of
the other early cases of that one come
from the other side of the river at the
angsty River as it happens so it looks
like one strain was certainly
circulating in the market and maybe the
other but it could easily have been
circulating in people there's no
evidence that it was animals now there's
a slight concentration of those samples
in one corner of the market which is
where animals were on sale
um so that's perhaps suggesting okay
where
where the toilets were and the Mahjong
uh clubs were and things like that so
you know there's lots of other reasons
why it might have been in that corner
but they tested 80 000 animals is there
any evidence of animal to animal
transmission of this virus
well since the pandemic began uh animals
like mink and deer have caught it and
are transmitting it to each other so yes
it is capable of transmitting in in
other animals
um uh but
um does it do it effectively much less
effectively than it does in people uh or
monkeys or mice okay so that's that's a
big problem right because we have these
trillions of viruses and and this
variant
um this this covid variant doesn't
transmit very well in animals and so
that also makes it incumbent upon the
people who claim that it had an animal
origin to explain that how given that it
isn't very transmissible in animals and
that
the probability of a human transmitted
virus is very unlikely uh that puts
additional constraints on the notion
that this was an animal transmitted
virus
right because it's not very good at
doing that yeah I mean remember the one
thing we do know about it is that it's
originally a bad virus it's these these
SARS like coronavirus cybika viruses are
found in horseshoe bats they're not
found in other kinds of bats or other
kinds of animals that's their natural
Reservoir and in those bats they're not
particularly lethal and they cause
mainly uh intestinal disease rather than
a respiratory disease and they use very
different receptors so some things
happened to enable that virus to adapt
to uh causing a respiratory disease in
human beings rather than an intestinal
disease in bats now that something could
have been an intermediate host like a
bamboo rat or or something on sale in a
market or it could have been a humanized
mouse in a lab because what the Wuhan
Institute of biology were doing they
were infecting humanized mice now these
are mice that have had the Ace II
receptor Gene from human beings inserted
into them in place of their own ace2
receptor so their lungs are expressing a
particular protein that is only found in
human beings and so if you infect an
animal this mouse with the virus you're
effectively testing how dangerous this
virus is on human beings now the worry
here is that if one of those mice
escapes or if it
um you know bites a lab worker or
something like that
we're dealing with a virus that's been
trained in these mice and in human cells
in the lab to infect human beings and
that's the you know that's the concern
with this kind of experiments the the
mouse experiments were done at biosafety
level three that's pretty good that's a
a negative pressure cabinet uh you know
completely sealed
um uh where you know the air is properly
filtered before it can get out
but the
human Airway epithelial cell culture
experiments also done with the same
chimeric viruses were done at biosafety
level two in some cases now that's where
a glove and masks sorry where gloves and
a mask
um uh in fact you don't even have to
wear a mask at by safety level too now
if this thing was you know if SARS cov2
was in one of these human Airway
epithelial cell cultures
um and at biosafety level two it's more
likely than not that the researcher
would have picked it up
and might well have been asymptomatic
you know it's not a very severe disease
in many people and he might well have
gone to the market you know he might
have gone to the Mahjong club or
something and so something could have
happened along those lines
um the the the the the you know the the
contortions you have to go through
to say that we can close the case on
this are pretty extraordinary I mean for
a start you've got to assume that the
the Chinese are telling us everything we
need to know about the early cases were
some of the early cases lab workers the
CIA says they were they won't give us
the evidence as to how they know that
the Chinese say they weren't
the South China Morning Post reported
that the earliest case was a man who
caught it in uh in November the 17th
2019 well since then the official
Chinese that was based on a leaked
document an official Chinese have
disavowed that document said no no the
first case was in early December well we
don't know now if this was in the West
we would be all over this the media
would be all over this demanding more
transparency
and yet the extraordinary thing is we
don't hear much criticism of the Chinese
regime over this we don't hear it at the
G7 or
um uh the the
um what's called the cop 27 meeting you
know uh we hear criticism of China quite
rightly over their treatment of Hong
Kong and the uyghurs
but this to me is an even more
scandalous thing that that 20 million
people or nearly that may be dead and an
awful lot of people have been had their
lives turned upside down and we know
where it started and we know there are
two possible things that could have
happened there and we're not doing
anything to try to push back against the
regime's lack of transparency
and we're continuing to engage and gain
of function research
yes
um uh and and in cities too you know I
mean my co-author Alina Chan makes the
point that uh we shouldn't be doing this
kind of research in cities you know you
should if you're going to have a lab
doing this kind of work at all it should
be in an isolated area yeah like Mars
like Greenland or Mars yeah yeah yeah
um
um you know we don't do
um we don't cite nuclear power stations
in the middle of cities
um why should we cite virology labs in
the middle of cities it's exactly the
same argument uh Nick you know I I
follow genomics molecular biology
um uh uh pathology quite closely as a
writer not as a practitioner
and yet I didn't know that these
experiments were being done and when I
first heard the argument that it might
have come from a lab I said no no we're
not nearly clever enough to design a
virus this good
um well once I found out what we were
doing or what they were doing and how it
goes completely against the the rules
that biotechnology set itself in the
1970s saying look let's let's do this
kind of work but not on dangerous
pathogenic viruses because that could be
dangerous I was really shocked by how
how far into the manipulation and
testing of dangerous viruses we have
gone in the last 10 years
well so I guess part of the reaction
might be because I'm trying to
understand why there would be motivation
to
shut down let's say speculation
investigation into the possibility of a
lab leak and I guess maybe part of the
reason is that it reveals a reality that
in some sense is too Dreadful to
conveniently comprehend
and we we have a lot of problems like
that confronting us at the moment to
apocalyptic problems of one variety of
another and the problem here is that
we're we're doing
um potentially
we're stupidly doing potentially
dangerous things on a scale that can
produce exactly the kind of result that
perhaps has already been produced and uh
it'd be easier in some sense in the
short term just to stick our heads in
the sand and pretend it isn't happening
then you could add the complication
there that well we don't want to upset
whatever International Harmony we've
managed to establish with the Chinese
but and and I can understand why people
would be loath to reinvestigate that
problem too because we we have an
Associated problem here so we're we're
engaged with the Chinese in in a
multitude of different ways and to some
degree that's very beneficial I mean
there are far fewer Chinese people
facing acute privation than there were
say a few decades ago and the Chinese
have been relatively successfully
integrated into the world economy and we
have all of the cheap and desirable
Goods that the Chinese are producing and
all of that seems a lot more positive
than you know two antagonistic
populations facing each other in a state
of absolute economic privation but we
also have another problem which is while
the Chinese are pretty damn
authoritarian and they're still run by
the Communist party which is a dreadful
organization and and then we don't know
how much our entanglement with the
Chinese tilts us towards that
totalitarian
structure and so one of the things I've
been noting is that when the pandemic
emerged the totalitarians acted first
and they acted in a totalitarian way
which is well why don't we just lock
everyone down which is sort of the
totalitarian answer to everything and
then in our herd-like panic in the west
we immediately imitated them
and so that's the spread of a pathogen
too right that's the spread of a
totalitarian pathogen of ideas and
that's also shook us up terribly in the
west it isn't obvious to me at all that
the lockdowns were
we're the least bit justifiable they
certainly were justifiable ethically as
far as I'm concerned and it isn't
obvious to me at all that they were
justifiable practically and so we have a
pathogen of of covid to contend with but
we also have a pathogen of totalitarian
totalitarianism to contend with and
I would say the latter poses a much
bigger threat than the former lest we
keep mucking about with gain of function
research
yeah well um
you're absolutely right that
um a lot of the uh proponents of
lockdown in the early days uh were very
explicit about saying we'd never have
contemplated this policy if we hadn't
seen it work in Wuhan there was a
deliberate work yes exactly well it
worked for a while and then it didn't
work and so on
um and um so there was a very explicit
sort of China Envy going on but I think
you know I completely agree with you
that that uh you know China's
transformation in the last 50 years has
been Spectacular from one of the poorest
Nations on Earth to to a middle-income
country lifting more people out of uh
poverty than has happened in any
generation uh in in tens of thousands of
years that's magnificent and it was done
by Liberation it was done by Deng xiaop
Bing's policy of economic Liberation you
can start a business you can
um be a you can make money you can uh
you know trade you can do all these
things
um as long as you don't set up a rival
to the Communist Party
there was economic Liberation but not
political Liberation that was continued
under his successor particularly under
who Jin Tao and very successful it was
too it took a long time for us to
realize and certainly for me to realize
that Xi Jinping is not like that right
he is not sticking to that policy at all
he has completely abandoned any idea of
free enterprise
um for ordinary Chinese people and gone
to a completely State directed view of
the economy as well as society and a
police state of the most brutal kind
and that does change the the calculation
can I just tell you one little story in
respect of that about the Soviet Union
that I think is quite interesting here
because people often say to me look
we'll never know because the Chinese are
not going to let us find out what
happened in Wuhan in in the Autumn of
2019 so why bother speculating
well in swedlovsk in the Soviet Union in
1979 there was some kind of industrial
accident and 65 people died of what the
American
intelligence Community said was Anthrax
poisoning as a result of a leak from a
bio Warfare plot
the Russians said no it's not a bio
Warfare plant no they weren't handy
Anthrax no that's not what happened they
got food poisoning you're wrong
the Russians invited in an International
Panel of scientists to investigate led
by a Nobel Prize winner a wonderful guy
called Matt mezelson and after looking
around and visiting sweat loss now
called a katarinburg but it was then
called swedlask they um concluded that
the Russians were right the Americans
were wrong this was not an Anthrax
League
and uh case closed and the International
Community was satisfied
then the Soviet Union collapsed
and scientists who had worked in the
biowarfare plant because that's what it
was in swedlovsk came to the west and
told us exactly what had happened on
that day
one shift had taken off a filter to
repair it and had not put it back on
they hadn't told the next shift at what
they'd done and as a result of plume of
Anthrax spores was sent over the city of
swedlask killing 65 people if it had
gone the other way it would have killed
hundreds of thousands
um because it went over a relatively
unpopulated suburb
um so it took the best part of a decade
before the truth came out
and the the LIE had survived an
international investigation
but the truth did eventually come out in
that case
yeah so the moral of that story is that
not only do these things happen but that
they can be covered up quite effectively
although in that case not not finally
and perhaps not in this case and so
um I think it's it's so do you do you
accept the the the psychological
hypothesis let's say of convenience in
some sense this hoping that An
Inconvenient Truth will go away as
motive for those who are attempting to
make the case that the Assumption of a
leak is just politicization
or or do you think what else is going on
here
um
well the there's there's also a sort of
priesthood aspect to it
um virologists have been talking to each
other and living in their own world for
a while and they've now got
scruffy people like journalists and uh
people on the internet and people who've
done a little bit of research coming
along and invading their space and
saying I want answers to questions and
they find that impertinent they find
that annoying and uh they it it it it's
sort of
um you know uh it it's sort of beneath
them to have to answer questions from
these people so there's a that's an
another motivation a third motivation is
that there was a lot of there was a big
build up behind the idea that the reason
we had a pandemic was because we're
interfering with uh Mother Nature we're
encroaching on habitats of bats and
things like that they wanted it to be an
ecological cautionary tale and so
there's a reluctance to have it teach a
very different
um cautionary tale instead
um so there's a whole slew of
motivations that are causing
establishment science to behave a bit
like a priesthood here I mean there's
also Financial remember there's big
money in virology research and uh you
know a lot of scientists spend a lot of
their time thinking about where's the
next million dollars going to come from
to support my lab quite rightly it's
it's very competitive world and that
they fear that if the world concludes
that uh high-risk virology research led
to this accident that there will be no
more funding for high-risk virology
research you are not you or I might
think that's a good thing but it
genuinely affects these people's
livelihoods so no wonder they're going
to fight their corner it's also a
complicated thing I mean I am an uh an
advocate of an admirer let's say for
what it's worth of open inquiry and it
isn't obvious to me that it's certainly
not a simple thing a simple matter to
conclude that there's an area of
Investigation that's now permanently off
limits and then there's always the
danger that deciding that that area of
scientific air inquiries permanently off
limits leads to the spread of areas that
are permanently off limits and that
becomes politicized which it would
instantaneously so I know already that
there is politicking taking place on the
genetic database front such that those
who are investigating such heresies as
the heritability of intelligence the
multi-factorial heritage ability of
intelligence are having a very difficult
time getting access to the previously
publicly accessible databases that made
such investigation possible and so being
concerned about arbitrary restrictions
being placed on the domain of scientific
inquiry by well-meaning politicians is
definitely something to be concerned
about so this is a very complicated
problem I mean do you think it's even
possible to to conclude let's say that
well maybe gain of function research is
like
an exception to the rule we're not going
to fund a lot of random experimentation
on the new development of atomic weapons
in the middle of cities and we shouldn't
be doing we should be doing we should be
equally cautious with regards to gain
and function research in relationship to
viruses but then you know can we
constrain the constraints themselves so
they don't interfere with the scientific
process and that doesn't the answer to
that certainly doesn't seem to be
obvious
well the the sheer lack of curiosity
about investigating this question has
shocked me
um I approached the Royal Society I knew
some uh senior people at the Royal
Society and I approached them and said
look this is developing into a very
interesting debate lots of interesting
evidence has been put forward on the lab
League side and lots on the market side
don't you think it would be a good
subject for a set-piece debate at the
Royal Society with some experts doesn't
have to be me I'm not necessarily
pushing myself forward
um to talk about this and uh they said
oh no we only discuss scientific topics
as if this was a political topic right
right so I approached the the the
Academy of Medical Sciences uh and I got
roughly the same answer oh it's too
controversial
well you know I'm sorry
a new virus has erupted into the human
species forming causing the worst
pandemic in several hundred years
killing close on 20 million people as
far as we can make out totally turning
upside down the world economy
and we don't want to investigate how it
happened and whether it'll happen again
I'm sorry but I find that bizarre well
and we also insist that all such
investigations are nothing but
politicking which is also a sign
on a broader sense of the what of the
almost Universal acceptance of certain
post-modern dictums right that there's
no science without politics let's say
which is
um
well a problematic claim let's say to
say the least on that I mean I you know
I I I I I I I'm in a practicing
scientist for 30 40 years but uh most of
what I did had no political Edge to it
now when I open the journals I find
pretty well every article even you know
scientific papers seem to have to
um nudge their conclusions towards some
sort of quasi-political
um issue you know whether it's climate
change or economic inequality or
whatever rather than just saying here's
what I found and uh I don't know what it
means if you see what I mean I actually
went for completely different reasons I
was doing some digging into the
scientific literature about
um what happened at the end of the ice
age in the UK you know when the ice
melted I I it wasn't because I those
interested in modern climate change or
anything like that I just I just wanted
to know you know when did the Ice
disappear from different parts of of
Britain and what did the landscape look
like at the time and how long did it
take for vegetation to appear you know
is this was uh you know there's no
particular reason for doing this but
this just intrigued me one day and I
spent a few days uh digging into the the
scientific papers and I found a very
interesting pattern which was that any
paper published in the last seven or
eight years
um was sort of political it had this
sort of angle to it and either it wanted
to use the information that it was
digging up about the ice age to tell a
moral story about today's climate change
or something
um uh or it it was
sort of
interested in a kind of political
argument between two factions in science
and and I had to go back to the 1990s
where I found some very refreshingly
good papers that were saying things like
well here's what we think happened and
and here's a map of what we think
happened and and I don't agree with Fred
who thinks something else you know and I
just suddenly had a moment where I
thought hang on are we losing the
enlightenment view of science where we
were inquiry on its own is good
do you have a coffee lover on your
holiday shopping list Black Rifle has
all the best Brewing gear thermoses mugs
and apparel designed for folks who love
country and coffee Black Rifle sources
the most exotic roasts from around the
globe all coffee is roasted here in the
U.S by veteran-led teams of coffee
experts stuff your Christmas stockings
with the latest roast from America's
coffee for 10 off with the code Jordan
better yet sign your Secret Santa up for
a coffee Club subscription imagine the
joy of a pre-scheduled coffee delivery
your favorite roast when you need the
most it's the gift that keeps on giving
Black Rifle coffee company is veteran
founded and operated they take pride in
serving coffee and culture to people who
love America every purchase you make
with Black Rifle helps support veteran
and first responder causes go to
blackrifocoffee.com and use promo code
Jordan for 10 off coffee Coffee Gear
apparel or when you sign up for a new
coffee Club subscription that's black
riflecoffee.com with promo code Jordan
for 10 off Black Rifle coffee supporting
veterans and America's coffee
mm-hmm yeah well I I've got an idea
about that and so
it's a it's it's a complicated idea but
I I wouldn't mind discussing it with you
and just tell me what you think about it
because I am
it is obviously the case that
what we might describe as the postmodern
critique which has a Marxist Edge to it
for reasons we could get into
is has definitely made itself manifest
um
on the scientific front right and that
the claim
of the postmodernists in some real sense
is that there never was any science
without politicking and that
science itself is a political Enterprise
and If you deny that and usually
conducted on behalf of those whose who
have the current power and that if you
deny that that's only an indication of
the degree to which you're captured by
The Narrative of power
it's something like that and there's no
doubt that that's had an unbelievably
corrosive effect on the scientific
endeavor
in the social sciences and also in on
the philosophic Endeavor on the
humanities front and I saw years ago
that this was eventually going to be
aimed at the the stem types the science
technology engineering and Mathematics
types and
at that point nobody believed that was a
possibility but I saw it as a certainty
and I thought that the postmodernists
would go through the scientists like a
hot knife through butter
and and that made me ask myself you know
what are the preconditions for the
scientific Enterprise because we
shouldn't be thinking as scientists that
being able to think scientifically or
being allowed or encouraged to think
scientifically is something like a deep
Norm
in fact it's exactly the opposite right
it's it's it's an unbelievable exception
and it only emerged in the domain of
human cognitive Endeavor
once in history and that was say 500
years ago and it's had its run in some
real sense and made us technologically
powerful but it's a it's it's reasonable
to view it as a very fragile Enterprise
the preconditions for which we don't
understand
and so let me outline a precondition and
you tell me what you think about this so
I've been very interested in the
Nietzsche and idea of the death of God
right the and the Nietzsche believed
like Dostoevsky that
once our
faith in a Transcendent being collapsed
that the political in some sense would
immediately become religious
and or that nihilism would Prevail those
were the basic two outcomes and both
Nietzsche and Dostoevsky took that
farther they also prophesied that not
only would the political become sacred
as it took the place of this of what was
sacred but that there would be a
particular kind of political Endeavor
that would become sacred and that would
be the Endeavor that eventually
manifested itself as
in the Communist ethos and that all came
true with a Vengeance and then but I was
wondering more recently
the the judeo-christian claim and this
is the monotheistic claim is that
there's a Transcendent spirit
to which we must pledge allegiance so we
must worship and celebrate let's say
that we must mimic and uh that
constitutes the basis of the religious
Enterprise but then there's an analogous
claim which I think is derived from that
claim
that there's a Transcendent object
that whose fundamental nature escapes
our apprehension and that pursuit of a
relationship with that Transcendent
object is the proper
activity of the scientist and so that
would be the scientist who always
assumes that his epistemology that his
theories are incomplete
that something real and comprehensible
lies outside the domain of that theory
and that attempting to make contact with
that Transcendent domain is actually the
proper
mode of conduct for a scientist and I
can't help but see that as both deeply
analogous to and maybe even a derivation
of that more fundamental religious
orientation and so then I've been
wondering more recently is that
if the death of God so to speak also
although surprisingly will mean the
demise of the Enlightenment Enterprise
because it was predicated on an
unconscious religiosity that presumed
the existence of a Transcendent object
and and the possibility of a beneficial
relationship between the Inquirer the
scientist and that object itself and so
well I know that brings us somewhat far
afield
with regard to our discussion of covet
but but yeah but no no that's
fascinating and and
um I'm gonna pick up on a couple of
points and may forget to address some of
the very interesting points you just
made
um the first thing to say is that
like you it don't I mean not as soon but
it eventually dawned on me that uh that
the postmodern Revolution was gonna
consume not just the soft Sciences the
human and Humanities but hard science is
too and I remember realizing that there
was a sort of you know anthropology
department 20 years ago had a sort of
lying down the middle of the corridor in
each department in each University on
one side were rational people who looked
at bones or did ethnography or something
and on the other side were people who
were very politicized uh very
post-modern very meta in their approach
and these two tribes were or at each
other's throats in anthropology now
um that then happened to psychology it
happened to quite a lot of other
sciences and and you know those of us
who thought well it'll never happen to
maths
um well I'm afraid mathematics is
already being challenged you know is it
is it sufficiently feminist is it
sufficiently
um uh non-white you know all these sort
of things are trying to dismantle
um what seems to me are completely
objective
um discipline
um at the same time now how far it'll go
I don't know I like you and like that
other Great Canadian Stephen Pinker I'm
really worried about the fragility of
the Enlightenment philosophy
um I think the sort of high point of
people like Richard Feynman and Francis
Crick saying uh wonderfully uh
open-minded and skeptical things about
everything and as a result uh
challenging each other to find out
things about the world
um looks a little to me like it's harder
to do these days and it's as if I've
I've living through the period at the
end of the the Roman Republic when the
tremendous open-mindedness of people
like lucretius and others like that got
swept away in the the uh the book
burning and idea suppressing stuff that
came frankly with Christianity
um uh and so unless
I'm less sympathetic than you I suspect
to
the role of religion here I don't think
religion was a friend of of open inquiry
into
um Mysteries of the world
um uh and well we should maybe maybe
let's let let me let me let me
differentiate two
sub categories in relationship to that
I've talked a lot to people like Sam
Harris and to Richard Dawkins about
exactly these issues say about the
antagonism between religion and Science
and so one of the things that I really
saw so Dawkins regards the religious
Enterprise as
pseudoscientifics all that that body of
pseudoscientific proclamation that
impedes the the rational progress of
Enlightenment science and so that's his
perspective and and I'm not trying to
parody it or to put it down in any sense
I'm just trying to relate it and whereas
Harris and I'm using these two people
because they're examples for perhaps of
the world's most famous atheists
Harris's argument is is more
it's more emotional than that in some
sense uh and I don't mean irrational I
mean based in a deeper emotion Harris
identifies the spirit of totalitarianism
and malevolence with the religious
Enterprise he and I think that's an
error because
he's throwing out the baby with the bath
water
what's interesting to me in relationship
well so I would say you you're talking
about the antagonism between religion
and science But but so one of the things
I really admired about Dawkins and his
work has been quite helpful to me by the
way is that he has this clear-headed
faith in science this in rationality
that's typical of the best scientists
Perhaps
Perhaps someone like Feynman for example
and but Dawkins like all true scientists
believes that there is a Transcendent
truth and that the pursuit of that truth
will set us free and it's those claims
that I think are essentially religious
and so I think it's useful to
differentiate between the religious
impulse towards truth if if you can call
out the religious impulse and the and
the totalitarian aspect of the
imposition of religious Dogma which I
see actually as a variant not of the
religious spirit but of the totalitarian
spirit
because I I do believe the greatest
scientists that I've known have a
religious reverence for truth now they
they say objective truth and that's
that's fine it's perfectly reasonable
variant of truth but the reverence
itself doesn't seem to me to be
scientific it's predicated on whatever
it is that drives reverence and I'm
afraid that what's happening at the
level of the postmodern critique is that
it's it's actually a corrosive critique
of that reverence itself it's the claim
that that reverence is nothing but a
mask for Power claims for example and
that man that is a corrosive criticism
and it might be corrosive enough to
bring the whole damn Enterprise to a
halt and I see it shuddering forward
with the corruption of journals like
Nature and Science and and the
increasing politicization of every
scientific discussion and I I I I I I
I'm with both you and Dawkins there and
the sense that I like him have got this
reverence for Science and truth and
somewhat skeptical of whether religion
shares that because I think faith is
antithetical to it but
he is perhaps wrong that the enemy is
conventional religion
because actually creeping up on us has
been a much more dangerous
anti-enlightenment Force as you say the
the postmodernism and
um uh thing a lot of other things that
go with it and totalitarianism exactly
and I you know I think the the the the
critique you can make of atheists like
me
um very validly is that when we throw
out the baby
um sorry the bath water the baby goes to
and we end up with something far worse
well that's that's the issue the The
Cult of Stalin or the or the cult of
fouca or whatever it might be you know
um and uh so it in that sense
and you know actually Richard concedes
this that if you're gonna have
if you can't exterpate uh Faith from the
human spirit
then you might as well have a mild
version of it called The Church of
England oh okay
let me push let me push you a little bit
on that too because I'm very curious
about this issue of the faith predicated
presumption of the properly functioning
scientists so
um it seems to me so imagine that and
you tell me if you think I've got any of
these presuppositions wrong because
they're they're they're crucially
important to this argument so the first
is the belief in the existence of a
Transcendent object and I would say
that's a faith-based belief and here's
why so you have a scientific theory and
you can't help but look at the world of
objects through that theory so when you
see the world of objects in your
discipline that that Vision that
perception is informed by your
epistemology but you know as a scientist
that you're wrong
but the knowledge that you're wrong is
predicated on an assumption and the
assumption is that there is a domain of
information that as yet that exists
as yet outside your presuppositions
and that has to be a faith-based Axiom
because given that that source of
information exists beyond your current
set of axioms you can't encounter it you
have to just accept it as a continuing
reality and it would be the reality of
that knowledge that currently lies
Beyond us
well I see I certainly I certainly think
that
um uh the purpose of science is to find
new Mysteries it's not just to solve
them because in solving one you always
come upon more you know in finding out
that we're just a uh a marble a Blue
Marble spinning through space we then
find there are things like Suns and
galaxies and black holes and things Each
of which is a new mystery that that we
have to address and I love that aspect
about science that you know the more
trees we chop down in the clearing of
knowledge the more Forest comes into
view as it were the more stuff we don't
know and don't understand and I think
it's it's worth reminding ourselves that
you know what what gets scientists up in
the morning in a lab is not
the things they know already you put
them on the shelf and feed them to the
students it's the things you don't yet
know it's the the part of the puzzle you
haven't yet found out and we mustn't
lose that well and you would you you did
refer to that and I think this is
extremely interesting you referred to
that as a love
and that's not that's not that's not an
objective observation in some sense
right it's a reference to a particular
kind of motivation and so but then let's
say we could look we can inquire into
that a little bit more deeply we might
say well what's that love predicated on
and one
possible sources that while you see that
it engages you in a meaningful
Enterprise right so there's a sense of
implicit meaning in this search to make
contact with that which still lies
Beyond you and so that's engaging and
and it's deeply engaging it's part of
the Instinct of meaning as as far as I'm
concerned but it's also predicated on
the idea and I I can't help but think
that this is fundamentally a religious
Axiom and I think it's a judeo-christian
derived religious Axiom which is that
you also believe that the truth will set
you free and in some sense Matt our
whole bloody discussion today centers on
that right I mean you're delving into
the covid-19 mystery because you are
making a presumption here against those
who would take the pathway of
convenience and deceit let's say that no
you don't get to do that I don't care
what your rationales are something
actually happened in Wuhan and we the
reason we need to find out what it is is
because finding out what is true is
actually the best pathway forward
regardless of your bloody political
preconceptions and I can't see sin this
is a genuine question to you I don't see
that as anything different than a
reference to the work to the idea for
example that the Divine word of or that
the word of Truth itself is divine and
that the the manifestation of that
truth is in fact freeing and I I don't
think that's how within science claim
I no I'm completely happy with that
um I can give you some very dull
practical reasons why we need to find
out how the pandemic started so that we
can predict where the next one's coming
from so that we can deter bioterrorists
and Bad actors who might be thinking of
copying what happened
etc etc but those aren't my real
motivation my real motivation is because
I think truth matters more than anything
else there's a wonderful quote somebody
gave me the other day which he said was
from solgenitsin but I don't think it is
I'd like to know who said it truth
matters more than consequence you know
right right right
don't want us to know what happened or
worried about the consequence of finding
out what happened but I'm sorry the
truth comes first we have to deal with
the consequences of finding out the
truth but the truth is what I really
care about and I I do think in a sense
it'll set me free and you free and all
of us yeah
um it may be uncomfortable just as
finding out that we're you know we're
not at the center of the universe we're
not a unique creature we have the same
genes as others uh we're 40 genetically
the same as the banana you know these
are all humiliating things science has
found but they're they're not uh but for
me they're liberating as well well and
you you made a very strong argument
there on the consequence front so
because look here's the totalitarian
presumption in it essentially is that
well we have a political Theory so let's
say it's Marxism in this case and we
bloody well know it's right
and so because we already have the truth
at hand then
all of our endeavors should be devoted
towards the promotion of that truth and
it's a final truth and we have it at
hand there's no Transcendent truth there
apart from the doctrine itself now your
proposition and I think this is the
proposition of true scientists is no no
you have to abandon your political
presumptions completely and that means
that you have to face even those truths
that make you tremendously uncomfortable
cognitively and emotionally in the
moment you cannot use that discomfort as
evidence
you have to assume regardless of such
evidence strangely enough that in the
final analysis All Things Considered
there's nothing that's more liberating
than the truth and I Matt I think that
that's the core doc I do believe that's
the core Doctrine upon which
judeo-christian Society itself is found
it because the the doctrine of the
Divine word is something like this as
far as I've been able to tell it's
something like
the proper action of the Consciousness
that liberates us is the forthright
confrontation with the with possibility
itself with potential itself and the the
willingness to confront that head-on in
truth and the consequence of that
confrontation is the construction of the
habitable world that is good that that
seems to me to be the doctrine of the
word at the beginning of Genesis and
there's a notion there that human beings
men and women alike are made in that
image and I suppose you could argue
about my theological interpretation but
but that does seem to be the doctrine
yeah I'm no Theologian but I think what
you're describing and this is perhaps
where I do differ from you is Judea
Christian philosophy as
tamed or refracted by the enlightenment
uh by Spinoza and Descartes well and by
the Greeks
well no but I think I think the problem
you know I think if you go back and look
at the early history of the church it
was a a brutally nihilistic cult that
stamped out a lot of openness that came
from the Greeks and so I don't think I I
you know I I I don't think that that it
was as harmless for its first thousand
first fifteen hundred years as as
Bishops and Priests like to tell us now
in that sense I think it was like the
modern Communist party which in China
says the party matters most Xi Jinping
is right about everything you must see
everything through the lens of how you
can help to further our aims which is a
you know a deeply unimaginative way of
seeing the world I think a lot of modern
Islam is like that and I think quite a
lot of you know the most fanatical parts
of Christianity are like that
um uh and I think Christianity was like
that for most of its first 1500 years or
at least in in bursts it was and then it
it came to terms with the wonderful
ideas of the Enlightenment and I I I
just want to introduce another word here
that I think is very important and that
word is wonder I do love the wonder that
I get from a deep understanding of I
don't know deep geological time or the
scale of the universe or where a virus
came from or whatever it it's it's
wonderful in the literal meaning of the
word and I don't feel that real that
Christianity or religion generally has a
monopoly on that wonder I think Richard
Dawkins has made a very good point here
that unweaving the rainbow
um finding out what a rainbow is made of
has not made it less wonderful it's made
it more so and Keats was wrong about
that well that that I agree with with
that by the way
I also think and this is why we have to
be very careful about our use of
terminology is that I would say that the
uh
the the negative religious phenomena
that you're describing are a
manifestation not of the religious
spirit but of the totalitarian spirit
and that those are often conflated okay
and then I would say that and to put
this into a deeper context that sense of
wonder that you described
I don't think that there is any
difference between that and proper
worship
because I think attending to The Wonder
of being is the fundamental religious
act in some real sense and there are
preconditions for that and one of them
is a an epistemic humility right you
have to allow yourself to to apprehend
that which is beyond and that is an
instinct and I think it's part of the
Instinct that drives love itself and so
I would be very interested for example
in the psychophysiology of awe
and that's associated with Wonder and so
one of the things that's extraordinarily
interesting about awe is that it
involves pilo erection
and so I know when you see a cat puff
itself up
um in a burst of fur when it sees a
giant Predator it's it's pilo erection
it's driving that and when you get those
chills up and down your back and maybe
your hair stands on end it's that same
apprehension of
of you could think about a predator as
an unsolved mystery to to an animal we
we use that same framework of Wonder and
awe to apprehend the unknown itself and
we've learned to contend with the
unknown as as a potential Predator
obviously but also as a potential source
of redemption and that I would say being
Guided by that sense of wonder which is
humility predicated and driven by a
desire to pursue the truth that is the
manifestation of the most fundamental
religious Instinct and I think that
needs to be differentiated from religion
as a dogmatic structure which can
degenerate towards totalitarianism like
any other human endeavor and does right
and we have to be on the on the watch
for that but we don't want to throw the
baby out with the bathwater
yeah that distinction between religion
as a an institution and religion as a a
a a a a psychology and epistemology is
is vital and one that I see in science
now too I keep saying right right uh
science science is is a fantastic human
achievement
um I think it's the greatest human
achievement you know the knowledge that
we've acquired of the world is to me
more important than uh music poetry art
Etc no that marks me out as a bit of a
Philistine Affair but it's what I think
but that doesn't make me a fan of
science as an institution increasingly
I'm disinfect disaffected with it
um with the way that it it turns into a
cult the way it it it it it it it
behaves in a self-interested way the way
it turns its back on knowledge uh um and
I think there's a real problem with
science as an institution but not a
problem with science as a philosophy
well well I okay so I want to make a
differentiation there too because you
talked about science and your admiration
for science in part as an admiration for
the body of knowledge that's been
generated and and I can understand the
utility of that because that delivers
for us our Tech our technological and
pragmatic uh uh capability let's say but
but I don't think that by your own
testimony so to speak that that is what
you admire most about the scientific
Enterprise because you said to me that
you spoke to me about your love of
inquiry and it seems to me you could
distinguish science as a practice from
science as a body of knowledge
and you could say well that the attempt
to put forward that body of knowledge
can degenerate into a totalitarian
Enterprise or become corrupted by
political matters but so let's just
parse that off for a second we could say
this is this is worth thinking about in
relationship to what universities do is
that when you're training a scientist
you're not stuffing someone's head full
of scientific facts not primarily
although you may also be doing that what
you're doing is training a certain
you're training an adherence to a
certain Spirit of inquiry and then I
would say that the great achievement of
the scientific Enlightenment is not the
production of that body of knowledge
even though that's admirable in and of
itself it's the training and fostering
of a spirit of inquiry that's passed
forward from from uh let's say PhD
supervisor to student in the entire
scientific Enterprise and that the yeah
the most valid okay okay so so so and
then I would say it isn't obvious to me
that true
those who pursue a genuine religious or
alternative creative path are
distinguishable in some sense in their
ethical orientation from genuine
scientists it's the same spirit it's a
spirit of humility it's a spirit of
pursuit of truth it's us it's a desire
for relationship with the Transcendent I
know that's viewed differently by
scientists because of their emphasis on
the object but it isn't obvious what the
Transcendent object is I mean
um
it gets less obvious as we investigated
in some real sense
and so I'm afraid that that this battle
and you already made made allusions to
this this continuing battle between
those who profess religious belief in
the most fundamental sense and those who
profess scientific belief is blinding us
to the fact that there's an Enterprise
afoot that will bring both down
absolutely I think that's extremely well
put and just just back to to your uh the
the point you made about uh how it's not
the body of knowledge it's the method of
inquiry that turns me on as it were
philosophically
um psychologically at least
um I had a very Vivid experience first
term at University new book published by
one of the professors that was about to
teach me it turned out his name was
Richard Dawkins the book was called The
Selfish Gene and that sent those hairs
up on the back of my neck reading it
because it was the first science book
I'd read that didn't say here's the
answer
to the question it said here's a
question and I don't know the answer but
I'm going to take you on a journey to
try and understand my way of framing
this this this mystery and it was
suddenly it was like being shown the
edge of the world it was like being
shown you know the the opening up of the
Mysteries was was so important uh that
he the in the early pages of that book
that he does very very beautifully
um and so I I think you're absolutely
right there was something almost
religious in the way that the famous
atheist Richard Dawkins came across to
me in those in those early days yeah
well you know I've met Dawkins a number
of times and and as I said his thinking
has had quite a lot of influence on on
the way I think in in many many ways and
I I can't help but admire him and it's
an interesting thing because I I believe
that his his insistence that the
religious Enterprise is nothing but a
superstitious
uh impediment to the clear progress of
science I think that that's
insufficiently differentiated because it
doesn't differentiate Spirit from from
from totalitarianism it conflates them
and and the totalitarian spirit is
subtle enough so that identifying it
with a given domain of endeavor let's
say the religious is a dangerous
understatement of the true danger of
that ethos because it can permeate
everything and is likely to and so if we
put the enemy in the wrong place so if
the scientific types for example assume
that its manifestation of the religious
spirit that's the primarily and primary
impediment to the scientific Endeavor
then we're going to be fighting the
wrong War and we're going to make
enemies out of people who should be
allies
I think that's a key point I completely
agree with you on that
all right well so let let me recap
because we're running out of we're
running out of time and so we've we've
been delving into the origin of the
covid virus and and we've also been
trying to answer the question well why
should we why is this not merely a
political Enterprise and even more
deeply than that why should we care
beyond the mere practicalities of
specifying the the the origin and there
are obvious practical reasons to specify
the origin because if it was a lab leak
then
well maybe we should be doing gain of
function research in labs in cities or
maybe not in totalitarian countries for
that matter certainly not with Western
Aid and those are all relevant questions
but then we also addressed a deeper
question which is
well is this investigation into the
origin of the covid virus not also an
Exemplar of
faith in the pursuit of the truth itself
regardless of
short-term and convenient political
considerations and is it not also an
expression of the idea that there is a
Pursuit that whose value transcends that
of any set of short-term or even
medium-term political considerations and
so that's really where we
that's what we investigated at the end
of the conversation and so
um
that's a summary for everyone watching
and listening it's been very helpful to
me actually to have this conversation to
to clarify that point that you know my
motivation and and I believe the
motivation the world should have to
answering this question uh is not as
practical but is in some sense
um uh you know
predicated on the Transcendent
importance of truth right right right
well right and you know I mean
I do believe that the West at its best
and that would be the West insofar as
the West has been has carried the beacon
of of freedom and human dignity and of
course we faltered in that many ways
that at its best the West
acts out that claim that the truth will
set you free and we've done that on the
religious front when we've been properly
religious and we've done it on the
scientific front when we've been
properly scientific and we lose that
fundamental Faith at our immense Peril
unless we're willing to believe that
human engineered deceit which is not a
bad definition of totalitarianism is
is it desire or nihilism itself as
belief in everything collapses
we don't want to do we want a world
where we accept either of those
Alternatives or their Dreadful marriage
let's say as the alternative and this is
a decision that we're all making not
least those of us who are scientists and
so the scientists who are listening I
would also say you great scientists or
not so great even you bend the truth to
political purposes not only at your own
great Peril as practicing scientists and
as human beings but you also warp the
entire structure of the world
and that is an an absolute abdication of
the opportunities that have been granted
to you by a society that strived for
hundreds of years to give you the
privilege of engaging in this pursuit of
the truth couldn't put it better myself
all right well to everyone who's
watching and listening I'm going to talk
to to Matt for another half an hour
as I do always with my guests on The
Daily wire plus platform and we're going
to talk about well I think what we're
probably going to talk about is how that
Spirit of Wonder made itself manifest in
Dr Ridley's life and how following the
manifestation of that Spirit
informed the development of his
extraordinarily interesting and
successful career
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com